How to parametrize a task
=========================

You want to define a task which should be repeated over a range of inputs? Parametrize
your task function!

.. important::

    Before v0.2.0, pytask supported only one approach to parametrizations which is
    similar to pytest's using a :func:`@pytask.mark.parametrize
    <_pytask.parametrize.parametrize>` decorator. You can find it :doc:`here
    <../how_to_guides/how_to_parametrize_a_task_the_pytest_way>`.

    Here you find the new and preferred approach.


An example
----------

We reuse the task from the previous :doc:`tutorial <how_to_write_a_task>` which
generates random data and repeat the same operation over a number of seeds to receive
multiple, reproducible samples.

Apply the :func:`@pytask.mark.task <_pytask.task_utils.task>` decorator, loop over the
function and supply different seeds and output paths as default arguments of the
function.

.. code-block:: python

    import numpy as np
    import pytask


    for i in range(10):

        @pytask.mark.task
        def task_create_random_data(produces=f"data_{i}.pkl", seed=i):
            rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
            ...

Executing pytask gives you this:

.. image:: /_static/images/how-to-parametrize-a-task.png


``depends_on`` and ``produces``
-------------------------------

You can also use decorators to supply values to the function.

To specify a dependency which is the same for all parametrizations, add it with
``@pytask.mark.depends_on``. And add a product with ``@pytask.mark.produces``

.. code-block:: python

    for i in range(10):

        @pytask.mark.task
        @pytask.mark.depends_on(SRC / "common_dependency.file")
        @pytask.mark.produces(f"data_{i}.pkl")
        def task_create_random_data(produces, seed=i):
            rng = np.random.default_rng(seed)
            ...


.. _how_to_parametrize_a_task_the_id:

The id
------

Every task has a unique id which can be used to :doc:`select it <how_to_select_tasks>`.
The normal id combines the path to the module where the task is defined, a double colon,
and the name of the task function. Here is an example.

.. code-block::

    ../task_data_preparation.py::task_create_random_data

This behavior would produce duplicate ids for parametrized tasks. By default,
auto-generated ids are used which are explained :ref:`here <auto_generated_ids>`.

More powerful are user-defined ids.


.. _ids:

User-defined ids
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :func:`@pytask.mark.task <_pytask.task_utils.task>` decorator has an ``id`` keyword
which allows the user to set the a special name for the iteration.

.. code-block:: python

    for seed, id_ in [(0, "first"), (1, "second")]:

        @pytask.mark.task(id=id_)
        def task_create_random_data(seed=i, produces=f"out_{i}.txt"):
            ...

produces these ids

.. code-block::

    task_data_preparation.py::task_create_random_data[first]
    task_data_preparation.py::task_create_random_data[second]


Complex example
---------------

Parametrizations are becoming more complex quickly. Often, you need to supply many
arguments and ids to tasks.

To organize your ids and arguments use nested dictionaries where keys are ids and values
are dictionaries mapping from argument names to values.

.. code-block:: python

    ID_TO_KWARGS = {
        "first": {
            "seed": 0,
            "produces": "data_0.pkl",
        },
        "second": {
            "seed": 1,
            "produces": "data_1.pkl",
        },
    }

The parametrization becomes

.. code-block:: python

    for id_, kwargs in ID_TO_KWARGS.items():

        @pytask.mark.task(id=id_)
        def task_create_random_data(seed=kwargs["seed"], produces=kwargs["produces"]):
            ...

Unpacking all the arguments can become tedious. Use instead the ``kwargs`` argument of
the :func:`@pytask.mark.task <_pytask.task_utils.task` decorator to pass keyword
arguments to the task.

.. code-block:: python

    for id_, kwargs in ID_TO_KWARGS.items():

        @pytask.mark.task(id=id_, kwargs=kwargs)
        def task_create_random_data(seed, produces):
            ...

As a last step to organize our code even more, we can write a function which creates
``ID_TO_KWARGS``. You can hide the creation of input and output paths and other
arguments in this function.

.. code-block:: python

    def create_parametrization():
        id_to_kwargs = {}
        for i, id_ in enumerate(["first", "second"]):
            id_to_kwargs[id_] = {"produces": f"out_{i}.txt"}

        return id_to_kwargs


    ID_TO_KWARGS = create_parametrization()


    for id_, kwargs in ID_TO_KWARGS.items():

        @pytask.mark.task(id=id_, kwargs=kwargs)
        def task_create_random_data(i, produces):
            ...

The :doc:`best-practices guide on parametrizations
<../how_to_guides/bp_parametrizations>` goes into even more detail on how to scale
parametrizations.
